---
title: Water Scarcity and Pollution
subtitle: The effect of improved water quality monitoring data on China’s water policy.
author: Will Rynearson
---

# Introduction
Access to freshwater is something many people take for granted. Simply
turning on the tap or buying a bottle of water makes it easy to
underappreciate the immense value of clean freshwater. Water is
essential for almost all aspects of modern civilization and is connected
to all three pillars of sustainable development – environment, society,
and the economy.

While water (H~2~O) is a permanent resource, water that is usable and
consumable by humans is not. Globally, only 2.5 percent of the earth's
water is non-saline, with most of the remaining freshwater being
inaccessibly located in glaciers, ice caps or permafrost.[^1]

Water scarcity, being the scarcity of availability or access to usable
freshwater resources, is a significant and increasing global issue.[^2]
Globally, water usage has increased at a rate of 1.7 times the rate of
population increase over the past century.[^3] Water stress and scarcity
can be caused by increased water withdrawal, population increase, and
climate, amongst others.[^4] Water scarcity is three dimensional,
including physical, infrastructural and institutional factors.[^5] While
some regions are affected more than others, every continent is affected.
Four billion people experience extreme water scarcity at least one month
out of the year.[^6]

The implications of water scarcity cannot be understated. Global water
crises stemming from water scarcity are predicted to be the largest risk
globally within the next decade.[^7] Since water is vital for human
existence, a lack of water can be directly or indirectly related to
almost any societal indicator.

One direct impact of water scarcity can come in the form of food
production. Globally, 70 percent of global renewable water resources
withdrawn for human use is used for agriculture.[^8] Affected by
population growth and the increased consumption of more water-intensive
food due partially to economic development, it is estimated that food
production must increase by 70 percent to meet demand.[^9] Another
impact is health. Health can be affected by the quantity and quality of
water. The impacts of dehydration, water-borne diseases, and consumption
of polluted water are well documented. A third impact is economic. By
2050, some regions could see a GDP growth rate decline of up to six
percent due to “losses in agriculture, health, income, and property”
caused by water scarcity.[^10]

Water issues in China are especially prevalent. On average, China’s
renewable freshwater resources were 2,062 cubic meters per capita in
2014, a decrease from 4,200 cubic meters in 1962 and far less than the
half of the world average in those respective years.[^11] China’s
renewable freshwater resources are also highly location dependent. For
example, only 19.7 percent of total internal renewable surface water and
30 percent of groundwater resources reside in northern China.[^12]
Northern China’s renewable freshwater access is only 757 square meters
per capita per year, far below the water scarcity limit of 1,000 square
meters per capita per year.[^13]

In addition to the already strained water resource problem, poor water
quality caused by pollution is amplifying the problem and is causing
further economic, societal and environmental problems. Roughly 80
percent of groundwater resources were found to be unsafe for human
contact.[^14] Economic costs attributed to poor water quality in 2003
were over 1.16% of GPD.[^15]

Historically, and especially since the Opening Up and Reform era
post-1978, the Chinese government has prioritized economic growth over
environmental protection. In terms of water resource management, the
government’s investment strategies have prioritized large scale water
infrastructure projects over environmentally-friendly pollution-control
policies, due to a variety of political and non-political reasons.[^16]
Mao Zedong famously embraced the idea of the now-partially-completed
South-North Water Transfer Project, one of the largest infrastructure
endeavors in history, by saying “The south has plenty of water and the
north lacks it, so if possible why not borrow some?”[^17]

In addition to having the political will and prowess to pursue economic
development, Chinese leadership has also at times shown a campaign-style
action to mitigate environmental pollution. One such example was the
substantial air quality improvements in Beijing during the 2008 summer
Olympics.[^18] However, similar outcomes regarding improved water
quality have not been as positive. Analysis of water quality trends has
been hampered partially due to data limitations, including public
accessibility, the scope of measurement, and technological limitations
including long latency periods.[^19]

Recently, further policy has been implemented to address water scarcity
and pollution issues. In 2015, the State Council released an ambitious
attempt to do this, colloquially known as the “Water Ten Plan,” which
sets water quality-related goals to be met by 2020.[^20] However,
results so far have been mixed, with nearly half of all provinces
missing their water quality targets in 2017.[^21] One factor which may
help this progress, and one of the goals outlined in the Water Ten plan,
is the improvement of water quality sensing technology and data
management.

Significance
============

As outlined above, water scarcity is one of the most likely and most
impactful risks facing humanity in the medium-term future. China acutely
suffers from water quality issues stemming from pollution. One of the
most effective ways to address this problem is with the introduction or
improvement of water policy. Policy regarding water usage, preservation,
or cleanup decided by the central government, or lack thereof, will
affect not only all Chinese citizens but those directly affected by the
products and resources derived from water in China, including
manufacturing, services, and agriculture.

Water pollution further limits the already scarce water in many regions
in China, where much of the freshwater resources available in streams,
rivers, and aquifers are unfit for human consumption or use. The lack of
freshwater could prove catastrophic to civilizations. Understanding the
connections between water scarcity, water pollution, and water policy is
vital for having a holistic view of the issue at hand.

Literature review
=================

This research proposal looked at many publications covering a broad
range of related topics, some of which are outlined below:

-   analyzed the current situation of water scarcity worldwide and found
    “two-thirds of the global population (4.0 billion people) live under
    conditions of severe water scarcity at least 1 month of the year,”
    with nearly half living in China and India alone.

-   look at water sustainability in China. They conclude that while
    China’s recent policy efforts to alleviate water scarcity have been
    laudable, they are insufficient.

-   look at water governance, water insecurity, and its related
    research. They find that a second-generation research agenda on
    water governance, including a focus on incentive structures and
    other multi-disciplinary approaches, is required.

-   looks at the effects that water management has on crop production
    and food security in China. They conclude that water management
    affects many aspects of China’s development, it also affects food
    pricing and security globally.

-   looks at the relationship between water resource management and
    droughts in China and find that demand-side management can be more
    effective in meeting the challenges imposed by increasingly-severe
    droughts.

-   looks at the impacts of climate change on water resources and
    agriculture in China. They recommend that further research should be
    conducted to further understand the impacts of climate change.

-   look at sustainable urban water resource management with a case
    study analysis of Tianjin, China. They suggest that a holistic,
    systems approach to water management is key for sustainability.

-   looks at the importance of full project life-cycle cost analysis in
    addressing water challenges, particularly with wastewater treatment
    facilities, concluding that there are serious inefficiencies
    currently.

-   take more of an overview approach in synthesizing literature
    regarding the politics of water in China. They find that there are
    serious gaps in the literature regarding hydropolitics in China.

-   look at the infrastructure side of water resource management in
    China with a review of the South-North Water Transfer Project. They
    find that this project is emblematic of the engineering-heavy
    approach often taken in China and will pose serious risks to
    regional governance and have serious environmental impacts.

-   looks at air pollution control policies in China with a
    retrospective perspective. They break down the history of air
    pollution policies into three phases, and conclude, amongst other
    takeaways, that there’s a continuously increasing demand for
    quantification of all aspects regarding air pollution, including air
    quality, source identification, atmospheric modeling, and health
    risk assessments. These conclusions have the potential to be
    analogous to future water policy.

-   looks at the implications of domestic and international stability
    stemming from China’s water scarcity and the government’s current
    plans to address it. They argue that many of the options to
    alleviate water scarcity (increase water pricing, remove the
    requirement to be self-sufficient in grain production, increased
    efficiency of water usage in agriculture) all have serious
    downsides, and can have serious negative effects on political
    stability domestically and internationally.

-   looks at water quality monitoring and improvements (at the time) in
    data collection. They argue that increased data collection itself is
    not enough to affect the management of water resources; data
    analysis and reporting are also very important, and that
    understanding why monitoring water quality is important in the
    design process of water quality monitoring itself.

-   looks at the emerging technology surrounding real-time remote
    monitoring (RTRM) and concludes that this technology will have a
    progressively-larger impact and importance for monitoring water
    quality.

-   and look at the emerging technology of an Internet of Things (IoT)
    based water quality monitoring system. They show that this kind of
    system can address some of the limitations of manual, lab-based
    water quality testing (time-consuming, costly, etc.), and their
    real-time monitoring capabilities offer a large potential for
    improved water quality monitoring.

Research objective
==================

This research wants to investigate the relationship between water
quality data, education and water policy in China. The hypothesis is
that improved data on water quality (including quality, precision,
quantity, and frequency improvements) can lead to improved knowledge by
the general population and by policymakers, which can lead to improved
action on water policy. Specifically, the proliferation of water quality
monitoring technology and its associated data analysis capabilities,
commonly referred to as big data, have the potential to have very
significant impacts on water quality awareness, education, and policy.

Anticipated Contribution
========================

Since the technology advances of this “big data” of water quality, there
has been limited research so far analyzing the impacts of this improved
technology worldwide, let alone in China. Additionally, China has only
recently (2015) announced aggressive policy approaches towards improving
water quality. Since the problems of water scarcity and poor water
quality are extremely unlikely to go away soon, new policy initiatives
have the potential to consider the education and knowledge aspects of
water quality and water quality monitoring.

Research Plan, Methodology and elaboration
==========================================

This research project plans to be done in several stages and uses
several different methodologies.

The first stage will deal with background research. First, desktop
research into the current state of water scarcity, water quality, water
quality monitoring, and water policy, both in China and internationally,
will be conducted, and an overview will be provided. Next, literature
review and case study analysis will be conducted, looking for previous
instances of “big data” water quality monitoring and any policy
decisions surrounding this. Additionally, an analysis of current water
quality organizations will be conducted.

The second stage will look at the current level of water quality
education amongst the populous and amongst policymakers. This stage will
include a cross-regional analysis of primary and secondary source data
collection through interviews and surveys. The primary source data
collection will be conducted by interviewing the general population and
policymakers, both of which who are and who are not directly affected by
poor water quality. The secondary source data will consist of analyzing
nationwide survey responses, including the China Social Survey
(中国综合社会调查).

Ideally, the second stage will be able to isolate the level of education
of water quality from other factors, such as location, local GDP, age,
education levels, as well as education from other sources, including
school, news, and media. This last part will be a challenge of this
research project.

The third stage will be to find a correlation between the education of
water quality from water quality data and water quality policies that
improve water quality. This correlation could be shown by showing
regions with real water quality improvement, or by looking at the
quantity and quality of new water policy being proposed and implemented
locally.

Solutions and impacts
=====================

The solutions and impacts provided by this thesis could be immense. If a
correlation between water quality data, education and policy can be
made, it has the potential of providing the academic backing to push for
more water quality-friendly policies, which can then lead to reduced
water scarcity.

Schedule
========

Thesis Writing Schedule
-----------------------

Stage one will be conducted during the summer and fall of 2019 and the
spring of 2020. During this time, a comprehensive look at all background
information and literature review will also be conducted. Parts of stage
two, including the secondhand survey data analysis, will also be
conducted during this time.

Stage two will be conducted during the summer of 2020. Field visit
locations, contacts, and other details will be determined prior to this
time.

Stage three will be conducted during the fall of 2020, including data
analysis of the data collected during stage two, and the crafting of the
final research report.

Proposed Date of Defense
------------------------

It is proposed that this research defense should be held on or around
January 15^th^, 2021.

Conclusion
==========

In conclusion, water scarcity has been shown to be a large risk to
people worldwide, especially so with people in northern China. This risk
is amplified by the poor state of water quality throughout the country.
Recent developments in water quality monitoring data and analysis have
led to the technological capability of large arrays of data sources.
This improvement in data quality, quantity, precision, and frequency
have the potential for having profound impacts on water policy in China.
This research project proposes to investigate this link and hypothesizes
that an improvement in data on water quality can lead to an improvement
in water quality education, which can, therefore, lead to an improvement
in water quality policy. Research into this topic will be of a
mixed-methodology method, including primary and secondary source data
collection. A cross-regional analysis will attempt to isolate the effect
of improved water quality data on water quality-related policy and will
be done through general population interviews, policymaker interviews,
national survey data analysis, and global case study analysis. The
findings of this paper can hopefully serve as a tool for current and
future water policymakers to address water quality issues in China and
abroad.

[^1]: [@shiklomanov_world_1993]

[^2]: 

[^3]: [@fao_aquastat_2014]

[^4]: 

[^5]: 

[^6]: 

[^7]: 

[^8]: 

[^9]: 

[^10]: 

[^11]: 

[^12]: 

[^13]: 

[^14]: 

[^15]: 

[^16]: 

[^17]: 

[^18]: 

[^19]: 

[^20]: 

[^21]:
